There are two common methods that
can be used for variable reduction.
These are factor analysis or
more technically correct,
exploratory factor analysis, and
principal components analysis.
Let's go through
the high-level concepts and
differences between
each of these methods.
Let's start by referring back
to the employee survey example.
You will recall that there
were three questions that can
be related to the concept of employee
satisfaction with supervisor.
Factor analysis assumes
that there is a latent or
hidden variable called a factor
underlying these three questions.
This factor is what basically causes the
way these three questions get answered.
In other words, how satisfied
you are with your supervisor
will determine how you
answer those questions.
So if you know the factor, which in
this case is really the rating for
employee satisfaction with supervisor,
you will be
actually able to predict what
the answers to the three questions are.
Principal components analysis,
which is commonly referred to as PCA,
on the other hand, makes no assumptions
about any underlying causal model.
Instead, PCA essentially summarizes
all the variance within the total
variables into fewer components and
reduces the number of variables.
So what is the primary difference
between the two methods?
PCA analyzes all of the variance
within all of the variables selected,
while factor analysis only analyzes
the variances that are shared or
common within the variables.
Another way to put it is that
PCA focuses on accounting for
the total variation, whereas factor
analysis focuses on accounting for
just the correlations
between the variables.
So factor analysis is trying
to answer the question of
what might be causing the responses, and
PCA is trying to answer how it
can summarize the variables.